( Kade sighs )
KADE:
I'm telling you,
I've been on Wayward Island
a million times,
and there is no Energon...
I don't think.
Optimus himself
notified us
of a faint Energon signal
emanating from these
coordinates.
If we find it, maybe he'll send
Bumblebee to pick it up
and congratulate us!
Don't start inflating
the balloons yet.
We have to find the stuff first.
( radar beeps )
Down here.
DANI:
If the Energon's been here
all this time,
why did Optimus only now
get a reading on it?
These ice caves
have probably
been slowly melting
for centuries.
Maybe only recently a tracking
signal could get through.
Cave paintings.
Some prehistoric clan
must have lived here.
Let's scrape
the frost off.
This isn't a Lad Pioneer trip.
We're on an important mission.
All right,
getting closer.
(  tender theme playing  )
Hey, guys,
check it out.
Guys?
( rumbling )
Aah!
( grunts )
Cody.
I'm fine, Dad.
Thanks, Heatwave.
Don't thank me.
I think you found
what we're looking for.
Then let's retrieve it
and get out of here.
This place is giving me the--
( screams )
♪  A routine patrol
With four Bots in stasis  ♪
♪  Years later awoke
In the strangest of places  ♪
♪  Earth was their home now
And in addition  ♪
♪  Optimus Prime
Gave them this mission  ♪
♪   Learn from the humans
Serve and protect  ♪
♪  Live in their world
Earn their respect  ♪
♪  A family of heroes
Will be your allies  ♪
♪  To others remain
Robots in disguise  ♪
♪  Rescue Bots
Roll to the rescue  ♪
♪  Humans in need
Heroes indeed  ♪
♪  Rescue Bots
Roll to the rescue  ♪
♪  Rescue Bots  ♪
Fascinating.
This is the find
of the century.
Of the past
thousand centuries.
A perfectly preserved specimen
from the neo-Paleolithic period.
Think of what we can learn
by examining him.
Um, did anybody else
just see his finger move?
( laughs )
You sure that stalactite
didn't hit you
on the head?
Toe twitch. I definitely
saw a toe twitch. Cody's right.
Unbelievable.
Signs of respiration, heartbeat,
brain waves.
It's alive!
How is that even possible?
The sub-zero
temperatures,
interacting with
the Energon shard,
must have put
our friend here
in a state
of suspended animation.
Let's wake him up.
Start chipping.
( gasps ):
We can melt him.
I'll go get a hair dryer.
DOC GREENE:
Not so fast,
my eager little
anthropologists.
The caveman's been asleep
a long time.
We need a thawing process
that won't shock his system.
Oh, a beta-base macrowave.
In combination with
nano-spectrality diffusion.
Yep, that's how
I'd do it.
( steam hissing )
( machine beeps )
( yawns )
( grunts )
( screams )
( gasping and panting )
What's going on?
Oh...
He likes me.
( sniffs )
Better you than me.
Ugh, he smells funny.
CAVEMAN:
Oh...
Aw, he likes me too.
He's nice.
As long as you don't
inhale.
Don't even think
about it.
He seems to really
have a thing for Bots.
Something about our presence
seems to calm the humanoid.
But why?
No idea.
But whatever works.
Let's take him back
to the firehouse.
You Bots can spend
some quality time with him.
( chomping )
Such a good appetite.
But horrendous
table manners.
Which I could forgive...
( sniffs )
...if it wasn't for the odor.
( chuckling ):
Kind of understandable,
given how long he's been
wearing that animal skin.
We should get him
some new clothes.
Mall trip!
Probably not a good idea.
If somebody saw him...
Every looky-loo in the country
would show up to hound him.
We can find some clothes
around here to give him.
It would appear that he is what
is referred to
as a "42 regular."
Now who do we know
who's that size?
Perfect fit.
I always suspected
Kade was part caveman.
My name is Blades.
What is your name?
( grunts )
I think he said "Ira."
I think he just grunted.
Ira is as good a name
as any.
All this Welcome Wagon stuff
can wait.
We have a mission
from Optimus, remember?
That Ira interrupted.
The Energon
in that necklace.
Where'd it come from?
He doesn't understand.
Yeah, I kind of picked up
on that.
The cave drawings we encountered
would indicate that Ira's clan
was visually oriented.
Great idea.
Cody, my art supplies.
Energon. Where can we
find more?
Ooh.
No, Ira. Spit that out.
( spits )
Bleh!
( coughs and spits )
He just needs to learn
how to get along
in the modern world.
Ira, this is called a banjo.
It makes music that most humans
find annoying.
And this is a lamp.
It provides light,
so you can make shadow puppets.
( groans )
( tweets )
Wow. That's great, Ira.
He's obviously
done that before.
Mmm. Must be the caveman
equivalent of television.
TV!
That's how
we can teach Ira.
I mean look how much
I've learned from it.
( dramatic music playing
over TV )
( police siren wailing over TV )
And, of course, the booths
at, uh, crawfish week--
( changes channel )
( ominous music playing
over TV )
( gasps )
( screams )
( grunting and panting )
HEATWAVE:
We have a runner.
Rescue Bots,
roll to the rescue.
( emergency sirens blaring )
( radar beeps )
Got a read.
That Energon necklace makes
a pretty good tracking device.
I certainly
didn't expect you
to personally pick me up
from the ferry, Mayor Luskey.
The least I could do,
Mrs. Dumont.
For someone who's been such
a generous benefactor
to our scientific
community.
( laughs )
( both exclaim )
( tires screech )
Aah!
( electricity crackles )
( grunts )
MAYOR LUSKEY:
It just came
from out of nowhere.
Wh-- What did?
Thank goodness
you're all right.
Oh!
What?
I'm afraid neither of us are.
( sirens blaring )
Stay in your vehicle,
Mr. Mayor.
Any sign of our
runaway caveman?
No. But I'm betting
he took to the rooftops.
Dani and Blades?
We're on it.
GRAHAM: We are too.
Poor guy,
out on his own.
Strange new world.
( exclaims )
And then
out of nowhere
jumped this--
This creature.
Most likely a bear.
Or a moose.
I've never seen
a moose downtown.
That means we're doing our job,
Mr. Mayor,
keeping them in the woods,
where they belong.
You're welcome.
You all right, ma'am?
The accident must've given you
quite a scare.
Chief, Mrs. Dumont's considering
making a huge contribution
for the new Luskey Wing
of the museum.
So we can't have
any more incidents
that will sour her
on our town.
You understand?
GRAHAM:
Tracking signals lead directly
to the museum.
But it's closed
for renovation.
Guess nobody
told Ira that.
( alarm beeping )
Silent alarm's been triggered.
There.
( groans )
( sobs )
Wonder what's got him
so upset?
He's homesick.
I have this.
Hey, Ira.
I know how you feel.
You miss your old world.
But you can't go back.
It's gone forever.
So wave goodbye
to your friends here,
and come home
with your buddy Boulder.
Bye-bye.
I think Ira's not the only one
who's homesick.
( gadget humming )
Hmm.
His vital signs and blood
pressure are slightly elevated.
It's only natural that the
trappings of the modern world
would be upsetting to Ira.
There are lots of good things
nowadays too, Ira,
like...
music whenever you want it.
( classical piano music
playing )
Oh.
Wish we could show him
more of the world
instead of having
to keep him cooped up.
Cooped up or not,
Ira's not getting us any closer
to locating the Energon.
Or to Bumblebee
coming to tell us
how awesome we are
for finding it.
Then what say
we go look for it.
You and me.
To Wayward Island.
Yes!
( grunts )
My best recommendation
for Ira right now:
as little stimulation
as possible.
Return him to the firehouse
for some rest and--
MAYOR LUSKEY:
Knock, knock. Who's there?
His Honor.
And a very special VIP.
Dr. Greene, I don't believe
you've ever met Mrs. Dumont.
Uh, yes.
Uh, that is, no.
But on behalf
of the scientific community,
I thank you for your, uh,
huge endowments.
It's a pleasure to meet
such a noted scientist.
I would love to see
what you're working on.
Well, I'm currently working
on this...Bunsen burner.
A turn of this knob,
and presto.
Wow.
Amazing.
( thump on door )
Switches right on.
Your fundraising dinner's
in a few hours, Mr. Mayor.
Mrs. Dumont, you probably want
to get to your hotel room
and freshen up.
Now that you mention it,
I could use a bit of--
( door rattling )
FRANKIE: No, Ira!
Come back.
Oh. Hello, Frankie.
I see that you found, um...
Dr. Ira.
Right. One of my colleagues.
( grunts and mumbles )
He looks
vaguely familiar.
And why is he
grunting?
Uh, he's not from here.
He's from--
Freedonia.
A very guttural language.
( grunts )
That means "hello."
And "bragh" to you as well,
Dr. Ira.
Charmed, I'm sure.
( giggling ):
Ooh!
Oh, what a delightful custom.
So, Dr. Greene,
what sort of experiments
are you and Dr. Ira
working on together?
Well, a bit of this,
and a bit of that.
( sniffs )
Uh...
Uh, the edible pencil.
For when you just have
to have a snack
while doing homework.
Uh, may I try?
ALL:
No!
It's a...prototype.
Not ready for public
consumption.
Oh. Well, we'll leave you
to your important work.
But, Dr. Greene, you simply must
bring the delightful
Dr. Ira to tonight's dinner.
Uh, that's gonna
be difficult.
Dr. Ira here has to catch
a flight first thing--
Chief, if I may.
If Mrs. Dumont
wants Dr. Ira there,
I won't take no for answer.
Of course.
I'll bring Dr. Ira personally.
Police escort.
Shall we,
Mrs. Dumont?
Ira at a fancy dinner.
( spits )
Whoa.
Not a beep.
Aah!
Heatwave, if there's
no Energon,
let's get out of here.
This place has a habit
of caving in.
Wait. I want to get a closer
look at those scribbles.
Who knows? They might give us
some info.
Whoa.
Are those...?
Yeah.
Our clan.
Autobots.
( grumbles )
Hey, you're stretching the
collar. It's my only good suit.
( growls )
Okay.
You are not going
to believe what we found.
( Ira gasps )
Are those...?
Bots? No way.
( Ira whimpers )
No wonder Ira felt such
an immediate connection
to you guys.
He must have known the Autobots
in that painting.
You Bots have been around
since caveman days?
This-- I don't know
what to make of.
( whimpers )
Some kind of meteor shower?
It's okay, Ira.
( grunts )
I think Ira's
trying to tell us
that Autobots saved him
from the meteors.
What about the rest
of his clan?
Hopefully the Bots
saved them as well.
But somehow
Ira got left behind.
So our fellow Cybertronians gave
him the Energon amulet
to keep him alive
in a frozen state.
If he knew those Bots,
it's almost for sure he knows
where there's more Energon.
That may be, but now's not
the time to pump Ira for info.
Like it or not,
Chase and I have to get him
to the mayor's dinner.
( indistinct chatter )
May I propose a toast.
To Mrs. Dumont,
for all her past generosity
to our town.
May it continue in the future.
( chuckles )
Bleh!
Huh?
DOC GREENE:
Ira.
Ugh!
Uh...an old Freedonian custom.
Then I assume it would be rude
not to join in.
Oh, my. What an interesting way
to eat lobster.
Uh, but-- But how exactly
does one--?
This might be a good time
to invite everyone outside
for my special surprise.
( chomping )
( groans )
( imitates groan )
That means "hello"
in Freedonian.
Over here,
Mrs. Dumont.
The perfect spot to watch
the surprise:
fireworks.
( fireworks whistle and pop )
( gasps )
Ira!
Rescue team.
Ira's on the loose,
vicinity of city hall.
Cody, see if you can
get a read on him.
Got him. He's heading
for the radio tower.
(  dramatic theme playing  )
( fireworks whistle and pop )
( growls )
( siren blaring )
He must think the fireworks
are meteors,
like the ones
that destroyed his home.
He's trying to protect
his family. Us.
( grunting )
Blades, your winch.
Hang back, Dani.
Ira sees you flying in,
it could upset him even more.
I can talk him down.
Dani, Blades, come and get me.
( grunting )
Ira, stop. It's okay.
( screams )
I got you, buddy.
We can't keep Ira here
any longer.
He's a danger to himself
and to others.
I agree. As much as the world
would benefit
from learning about him,
I'm afraid the reverse
is sadly not true.
( whimpers )
Sure, it used
to be his home,
but how's Ira gonna be happy
here all by himself?
( bird chirps )
Oh. Peep, peep, peep!
Something tells me
he's gonna like it just fine.
And by the way, the mayor said
to say thanks to Dr. Ira.
Mrs. Dumont was so charmed,
she doubled her contribution.
This is our last chance.
Ask him if he knows
where the Energon is.
Huh?
More Energon.
Where is more?
Some help. Scribbles of some
hills and of Ira waving.
( chittering )
( imitating squirrels chitter )
( laughs )
Go, Ira.
He'll be okay.
I know he will.
But what about you?
Looks like you're feeling
a little homesick too.
Maybe, but even though I can't
go back to where I came from,
as long as I have my friends
and my team, this is home.
Just wish I could take
this drawing with me
to remember him by.
I'll take a picture of it
for you.
( camera shutters click )
Hmm, Ira's primitive drawing
could almost be a map
of this area.
Some help. We already know
there's no Energon in there.
Maybe there never was any
big Energon supply after all.
Just what was in
Ira's necklace.
You never know. If the ice caves
continue to thaw,
someday you might
get a stronger reading.
It would be prudent
to check back occasionally.
Doesn't help us now.
(  dramatic theme playing  )